Document how to use the automatic tuning featore of the pid component (#2130)
LinuxCNC/linuxcnc: docs/src/motion/pid-theory.adoc

direction again.  After several of these changes, the average time
delay between the "peaks" and "valleys" of this movement graph is used
to calculate proposed values for `Pgain`, `Igain` and `Dgain`, and
insert them into the HAL model to use by the pid controller.  The auto
tuned settings are not perfect, but might provide a good starting
point for further parameter tuning.

FIXME: The author of these instructions have not tested automatic
tuning with tune-type set to 1, so this approach remain to be
documented.

Armed with this knowledge, it is time to look at how to do the tuning.
Lets say the HAL configuration in question load the PID component for
X, Y and Z like this, using named pin names instead of 'count=3':

 loadrt pid names=pid.x,pid.y,pid.z

If the component had used 'count=3' instead, all use of pid.x, pid,y
and pid.z need to be changed to pid.1, pid.2 and pid.3 respectively.
To start tuning the X axis, move the axis to the middle of its range,
to make sure it do not hit anything when it start moving back and
forth.  You also want to extend the axis ferror limit (following
error) to make LinuxCNC accept the higher position deviation during

> tuning.  Sensible ferror limit depend on the machine and setup, but
> 1 inch or 20 mm might be a useful starting points.  Next, set the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tuning.  The sensible ferror limit depends on the machine and setup, but
1 inch or 20 mm might be useful starting points.  Next, set the
```

Author: Look like a better phrase.

Pgain', 'Igain', 'Dgain', 'bias', 'FF0', 'FF1', 'FF2' and 'FF3'. All
of these need to have a sensible value for the controller to behave
properly.

The current implementation of automatic tuning implement two different
algorithms, seleged using the tune-type pin.  When tune-type is zero,
it affect 'Pgain', 'Igain' and 'Dgain' while setting 'FF0', 'FF1' and
'FF2' to zero.  If tune-type is 1, it affect 'Pgain', 'Igain' and
'FF1' while setting 'Dgain', 'FF0' and 'FF2' to zero.  Note type 1
require scaling be set so output is in user units per second.

When autotuning a motor with tupe-type 0, the algorithm will produce a
square wave pattern centered around the 'bias' value on the output pin
of the PID controller, moving from the positive extreme to the
negative extreme of the output range.  This can be seen using the HAL
Scope provided by LinuxCNC.  For a motor controller taking +-10 V as
its control signal, this might accellerate the motor full speed in one
direction for a short period before telling it to go full speed in the
opposite direction.  Make sure to have a lot of room on either side of
the starting position, and start with a low `tune-effort` value to

> limit the speed used.  Using too high 'tune-effort' might overload the

Reviewer: What is the correlation between tune-effort and controller output signal?
Does tune-effort ? 0.5 limit the output to +-5V in the above example? If yes, would be good to mention.

Author: It is one to one.  If tune-effort is set to 0.5, the output will move from 0.5 to -0.5 (ie +-0.5V).  Will try to make it more clear.

delay between the "peaks" and "valleys" of this movement graph is used
to calculate proposed values for `Pgain`, `Igain` and `Dgain`, and
insert them into the HAL model to use by the pid controller.  The auto
tuned settings are not perfect, but might provide a good starting
point for further parameter tuning.

FIXME: The author of these instructions have not tested automatic
tuning with tune-type set to 1, so this approach remain to be
documented.

Armed with this knowledge, it is time to look at how to do the tuning.
Lets say the HAL configuration in question load the PID component for
X, Y and Z like this, using named pin names instead of 'count=3':

 loadrt pid names=pid.x,pid.y,pid.z

If the component had used 'count=3' instead, all use of pid.x, pid,y
and pid.z need to be changed to pid.1, pid.2 and pid.3 respectively.
To start tuning the X axis, move the axis to the middle of its range,
to make sure it do not hit anything when it start moving back and
forth.  You also want to extend the axis ferror limit (following
error) to make LinuxCNC accept the wanted position to deviate from the
actual position.  Sensible limits depend on the machine and setup, but

> 1 inch or 20 mm miht be a useful starting points.  Next, set the

Author: Yes, ferror is ment.  I'll add it to the text.

> 1 inch or 20 mm miht be a useful starting points.  Next, set the

Reviewer: Ok. But is it needed to set ferror that high? I remember that even setting ferror from 0.01 to 0.1 allowed to run auto tune on your machine if I remember correctly.

> 1 inch or 20 mm miht be a useful starting points.  Next, set the

Author: I do not know how high it need to be.  I guess it depend on the machine.

=== Automatic PID tuning

Since LinuxCNC version 2.9, the pid component support automatic tuning
using the Relay method footnote:[The relay method is described in the
1984 paper Automation paper Automatic Tuning of Simple Regulators with
Specifications on Phase and Amplitude Margins by Karl Johan Åström and
Tore Hägglund,
link:https://doi.org/10.1016/0005-1098(84)90014-1[DOI10.1016/0005-1098(84)90014-1]].
This is a replacement for the now removed and obsolete at_pid
component.

The pid component uses several constants to calculate the output value
based on current and wanted state, the most important among them being
Pgain', 'Igain', 'Dgain', 'bias', 'FF0', 'FF1', 'FF2' and 'FF3'. All
of these need to have a sensible value for the controller to behave
properly.

The current implementation of automatic tuning implement two different
algorithms, seleged using the tune-type pin.  When tune-type is zero,
it affect 'Pgain', 'Igain' and 'Dgain' while setting 'FF0', 'FF1' and
'FF2' to zero.  If tune-type is 1, it affect 'Pgain', 'Igain' and
'FF1' while setting 'Dgain', 'FF0' and 'FF2' to zero.  Note type 1
require scaling be set so output is in user units per second.

> When autotuning a motor with tupe-type 0, the algorithm will produce a

Reviewer 2: Minor typo: `tupe-type`

square wave pattern centered around the 'bias' value on the output pin
of the PID controller, moving from the positive extreme to the

> negative extreme of the output range.  This can be seen using the HAL

Reviewer 2: Might be good to mention the `ferror` limits here also, even though the script does extend them automatically. The `ferror` can also help to automatically stop if the PID tuning goes way out of range, to prevent hitting any endstops.

limit the speed used.  Using too high 'tune-effort' might overload the
motor driver.  The extremes of the wave pattern is controlled by the
'tune-effort' pin.  The number of cycles in the tune pattern is
controlled by the 'tune-cycles' pin.  Of course, trying to change the
direction of a physical object instantly (as in going directly from a
positive voltage to the equivalent negative voltage in the motor
controller case) do not change velocity instantly, and it take some
time for the object to slow down and move in the opposite direction.
This result in a more smooth wave form on the position pin, as the
axis in question were vibrating back and forth.  When the axis reached
the target speed in the opposing direction, the auto tuner change
direction again.  After several of these changes, the average time
delay between the "peaks" and "valleys" of this movement graph is used
to calculate proposed values for `Pgain`, `Igain` and `Dgain`, and
insert them into the HAL model to use by the pid controller.  The auto
tuned settings are not perfect, but might provide a good starting
point for further parameter tuning.

FIXME: The author of these instructions have not tested automatic

> tuning with type-type set to 1, so this approach remain to be

Reviewer 2: `type-type`?
